Okay... long distance treks, crowded streets,
and fast paced activities. What do all of
these have in common? They are all situations
where tripods can't be easily used. Though
they are incredibly useful, sometimes tripods
just aren't convenient. In these situations,
knowing how to get a steady just using your
hands can take your footage from being distracting
to looking professional.
By far the easiest way to keep your image
steady is to have the right kind of camera
with the right kinds of settings. In this
regard, a camera with an optical image stabilizer
built right into the lens can go a long way
in lessening the inevitable small shakes and
jostles while holding the camera in your hand.
An optical image stabilizer is a floating
lens element that can sense small movements
and then use magnets to move the lens in the
opposite direction. It makes an image steadier
but often adds a lot to the price.
ii.Camera Design - Of course, the shape and
weight of the camcorder body itself can also
help keep your image steady. A shoulder mounted
camera with a weighted back end keeps an image
steadier since it uses your body as a pivot
point for both the weight and the movement
of the camera. Also, since the arm that is
holding the camera is close to the body, vertical
drift is often eliminated with this kind of
camera design.
iii.Wide shot - However, the easiest and most
effective way to make your image steadier
is to simply keep your zoom as wide as the
camera's lens will allow. Zooms not only magnify
objects in your frame, they magnify camera
shake as well. As a result zoomed images should
usually be avoided.
Keeping the camera steady doesn't just involve
camera features and design, knowing how to
position your body can be just as important.
Nowhere is this more important than the locked
down shot. The best way to keep a locked down
shot steady is by taking advantage of your
body's rigid skeletal structure. By placing
your feet slightly apart while keeping your
elbow and arm close and perpendicular to your
body, you can ease the burden of your arms
and utilize the steadiness of the bones in
both your arms and legs. Because your arms
are so close to your body, this method will
keep your shot from drifting vertically and
laterally.
Low angle shots are a great way to add depth
and interest to your video. Interestingly
enough, capturing steady handheld low angle
shots are actually easier than capturing a
standing locked shot. This is due to the lower
center of gravity that the best methods use.
Getting down on one knee with your elbow resting
on your leg can help you keep a wider stance
and lower center of gravity. For really low
shots, sitting on the ground in a cross-legged
position with your elbows on your legs can
help you keep horizontal and vertical balance
as well.
iii.Natural Objects - Of course, using the
natural objects around you can also be an
extremely inexpensive way to keep your shot
steady. You can lean against a wall or tree,
sit in a chair with armrest, or use the top
of a car hood for a steady shot. The main
idea is that by giving your arm an anchor
to rest on, you can eliminate most of the
jittery movements from your video.
Though it may not initially seem like it,
complex camera moves are possible with and
without a tripod. Shots that usually require
tripods and tracks like pans, tilts, and dollies
can - with practice and planning - look just
as good as those shot in the movies.
The first advanced handheld movement is the
pan. A pan can be performed by first getting
in the locked down position, then determining
where you want your pan to start and end.
Lastly, rotate your torso using only your
hips from your starting position to your ending
position while gently shifting the weight
from one foot to the other. Of course, easing
into and out of your movement will make the
pan easier on your viewers.
The next advanced handheld movement is the
tilt. A tilt can be achieved in a similar
manner to the pan. The biggest difference
is that instead of rotating the torso, you
must bend it forward or backward, depending
on the direction you want to go. For this
movement, it is a good idea to keep the camera
as close to your upper torso as possible since
that will give you the greatest tilt distance.
Probably the hardest advanced handheld movement
is the dolly. To perform a dolly movement,
it is best to keep the camera close to your
body while not touching your torso. Next,
bend your knees and walk forward in a gentle
heel to toe fashion. This will allow you to
get rid of the shaky impact of your foot hitting
the ground as well as most of the up and down
movement that walking usually requires. That
being said, this move will take the most practice
of all the advanced movements, but is usually
worth knowing as it can add color to a video.
Like running the four-minute mile, steady
handheld shooting can seem impossible. However,
with a knowledge of steady camera and body
positions as well as practice and planning,
you can also make the impossible happen.